NEP: update NEP with the PyDataMem_Handler struct as implemented in the PR (#19404)
numpy/numpy: doc/neps/nep-0049.rst

        typedef struct {
            char name[128];  /* multiple of 64 to keep the struct aligned */
            PyDataMem_AllocFunc *alloc;
            PyDataMem_ZeroedAllocFunc *zeroed_alloc;
            PyDataMem_FreeFunc *free;
            PyDataMem_ReallocFunc *realloc;
            PyDataMemAllocator allocator; 
        } PyDataMem_Handler;

    where the function's signatures are
    where the allocator structure is

    .. code-block:: c

> 

Reviewer: The `PyDataMemAllocator` structure is not [rendered](https://20781-908607-gh.circle-artifacts.com/0/doc/neps/_build/html/nep-0049.html#c.PyDataMem_Handler) at all. It might just need that empty line.

Author: added a blank line

>             void (*free) (void *ctx, void *ptr, size_t size);

Reviewer 2: Out of curiosity, why is a size is passed to `free`.

Author: This allows a strategy where, like in [`np_cache_free`](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/e69faef03428b82f5651a5fb521610ddea2bd22a/numpy/core/src/multiarray/alloc.c#L161) the memory is not actually returned to the operating system rather is kept for a possible future allocation of the same number of bytes. It is necessary for the current, default, allocation strategy.

Reviewer 3: If this isn't already mentioned in the NEP somewhere, can we include the justification of having this extra this parameter (i'm not opposed to it, but I think it's unusual enough to be worth explaining).

Reviewer: A `mmap`/`munmap`-based allocation policy could also benefit from the `size` argument in `free`.

Reviewer 2: It would be good know how it is intended to be used, and how, or where, it is tracked. Can it differ from the allocation size?

Reviewer: It shouldn't differ. However, the `shift_allocator` test that examines exactly this behavior, reports 3 unmatched sizes on exit (GC).

While there are always workarounds, two scenarios that would benefit from `size` on `free` are:
1. `mmap`/`munmap`-based allocators
2. Pooled allocators / Memory arenas

Workarounds (in case that we decide to stick with `PyMemAllocatorEx`) include:
1. Hiding the size in the preamble (like the `shift_allocator` test does)
2. Implementing a `ptr`-`size` dictionary inside the `ctx`

However, there are cases where even the first could be considered an overkill, e.g. memory-mapped page-aligned allocators (`mmap` always returns page-aligned addresses, which means it would require a wasted page to just store the `size`).

Author: If we move to `PyMemAllocatorEx` we will need to do the second work-around for the current, default allocator since it uses `npy_free_cache(void * p, npy_uintp sz)`, where `sz` is something like `PyArray_NBYTES(self)`

Reviewer: As long as the `PyDataMem_UserFREE` function signature remains [as is](https://github.com/mattip/numpy/blob/b4db79f2e287e41df1e98d895d61822ab809d808/numpy/core/src/multiarray/alloc.c#L402-L406), and since already the default allocator is "privileged" (e.g. `npy_free_cache` doesn't even accept a `ctx`, but also integrates `tracemalloc`/`eventhook` logic), I think there won't be any problem with it.

It's our decision whether or not `size` will be also advertised to custom allocators on `free` (#L408). But definitely the fact that the `default_allocator` needs it, makes a strong argument in favor of doing so.

            void (*free) (void *ctx, void *ptr, size_t size);
        } PyDataMemAllocator;

    The use of a ``size`` parameter in ``free`` differentiates this struct from
    the :c:type:`PyMemAllocatorEx` struct in Python. This call signature is
    used internally in NumPy currently, and also in other places for instance

>     C++11 (maybe older): https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/allocator/deallocate
>     C++17: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/polymorphic_allocator/deallocate
>     Rust (allocator_api): https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/alloc/trait.Allocator.html#tymethod.deallocate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    `C++98 <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/allocator/deallocate>`
    `C++11 <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/allocator_traits/deallocate>`
    `Rust (allocator_api) <https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/alloc/trait.Allocator.html#tymethod.deallocate>`
```
`polymorphic_allocator` is just an implementation of `allocator_traits`, so probably isn't interesting here.

>     The user must keep track of ``size`` and make sure it is consistent with
>     the ``alloc`` parameter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The consumer of the `PyDataMemAllocator` interface must keep track of ``size`` and make sure it is
    consistent with the parameter passed to the ``(m|c|re)alloc``  functions.
```
to make it clear we're not talking about the other user, the producer.

    #include <numpy/arrayobject.h>
    NPY_NO_EXPORT void *

    typedef struct {
        void *(*malloc)(size_t);
        void *(*calloc)(size_t, size_t);
        void *(*realloc)(void *, size_t);
        void (*free)(void *);

>     } Allocator;

Reviewer 3: The idea in this example is that `Allocator` is some third-party allocator API that a user is gluing to numpy, I assume?

This example confuses me a little because it does two orthogonal things:

* wraps some `Allocator` API that is not part of this spec
* implements some shifting logic

It might be clearer as two separate examples:

* One which wraps some imaginary third-party allocator API into a numpy memory handler
* One which takes any existing numpy memory handler and does this shifting logic

For the latter, a more naturalchoice of type for `ctx` would be something like
```C
struct {
    PyDataMem_Handler inner_handler;
    size_t offset;
} shift_context_t;
```
which avoids introducing a second allocator API `Allocator` which isn't the one the PR is talking about

Reviewer: > The idea in this example is that `Allocator` is some third-party allocator API that a user is gluing to numpy, I assume?

That's exactly the concept, which is, I believe,  a fair use of the `ctx` functionality. Good both for testing and demonstration.

> It might be clearer as two separate examples:
> 
>     * One which wraps some imaginary third-party allocator API into a numpy memory handler
> 
>     * One which takes any existing numpy memory handler and does this shifting logic

I agree. It probably would make more sense to split the example.

> For the latter, a more naturalchoice of type for `ctx` would be something like
> 
> ```c
> struct {
>     PyDataMem_Handler inner_handler;
>     size_t offset;
> } shift_context_t;
> ```
> 
> which avoids introducing a second allocator API `Allocator` which isn't the one the NEP is talking about

I guess the `shift` example could not make use of a `ctx` at all (NULL).

Reviewer 3: > I guess the shift example could not make use of a ctx at all (NULL).

Only if it hard-codes the shift amount as a compile-time constant. I think it's better to have it use the ctx because it makes it clear how it can be used even in simple cases.

Discussion
----------

The discussion on the mailing list led to the ``PyDataMemAllocator`` struct

> with a ``context`` field like ``PyMemAllocatorEx`` but with a different

Reviewer 3: Is intersphinx able to link to `PyMemAllocatorEx` here, if we do something like (but almost certainly not exactly) ``:c:type:`PyMemAllocatorEx` ``?

Author: fixed the intersphinx reference, your guess was correct
